Bridge Bites (https://cdn.acbl.org/interactivebites/OLB070Squeezed3Suits.htm)
citeturn40search0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: 10.7 years ago;   BRIDGE BITES  #70          SQUEEZED IN 3 SUITS                                                                       Brian Gunnell ... It looks like some kind of end-play or squeeze will be required, in which case it will help to work out West’s distribution.

  BRIDGE BITES  #70          SQUEEZED IN 3 SUITS                                                                       Brian Gunnell
 
♠ A954 ♥ QJT ♦ J5 ♣ AJT2               Both Vulnerable             South   West     North    East                           1♦         Dbl       Pass             2NT      Pass    3NT      Pass             Pass    Pass               3NT is an optimistic contract, but things get better when             West leads the Heart Three to East’s Ace.  East returns             the Heart Four at Trick 2.               What inferences can you draw from the play so far?
        Dummy   West            East          Declarer
♠ Q63 ♥ K2 ♦ A986 ♣ Q963
► There are 16 combined HCP in the E-W hands, and East has shown up with the ♥A.  As West opened the bidding West no doubt has the remaining 12 HCP (well, he might be missing the ♠J, we suppose).   The good news is that the Club finesse is working and that takes your trick total to 8 … the bad news is that the ♠K is sitting over your Queen, so there is no obvious way to score a 9^{th} trick.  It looks like some kind of end-play or squeeze will be required, in which case it will help to work out West’s distribution.  Playing on Clubs will shed some light, so (after winning that Heart on the second trick) you run the Club Nine, which holds.  On the third round of Clubs West shows out.  What is his distribution? ► Not five Diamonds (West didn’t lead one), nor three Diamonds (East didn’t raise), so assume four Diamonds.  How many Hearts?  West would have led top-of-nothing with three (also, East might have bid 1♥ with five), so assume West has four Hearts.  That means West started with 3=4=4=2 distribution and the hand is an open book: ►
  ♠ A954 ♥ QJT ♦ J5 ♣ AJT2  
♠ KJT ♥ 9763 ♦ KQT3 ♣ K8       Dummy   West            East         Declarer ♠ 872 ♥ A854 ♦ 742 ♣ 754
  ♠ Q63 ♥ K2 ♦ A986 ♣ Q963  
  What does West pitch on the third Club? -          If West pitches a Spade then you cash the ♠A and duck a Spade to West’s King, scoring the 9^{th} trick with the ♠Q -          If West pitches a Heart then you cash the ♥Q and run the ♦J around to West (now West must play on Diamonds or Spades, either of which gives up the 9^{th} trick) -          If West pitches a Diamond then you run the ♦J around to West’s Queen and have the timing to set up the 13^{th} Diamond.   Poor West was squeezed in three suits, but it required accurate card reading to take advantage of that.  It also required that Declarer played the Clubs just right, running the Nine first, and leading a low Club from hand on the second round.  That way he was able to win the third Club on the board (in case West pitched a Heart and Dummy’s ♥Q needed to be cashed), and keep the fourth Club as an entry to hand (in case West pitched a Diamond). Back to Index--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bridge Bites (https://cdn.acbl.org/interactivebites/OLBindex061.htm)
citeturn40search1 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: 10.7 years ago; THIRD TIME LUCK Y 63 As is quite often the case, Declarer must set up her side-suit before drawing trumps ... SQUEEZED IN 3 SUITS 70 Accurate card reading allows Declarer to squeeze West until the pips squeak
Back to Bridge Bites Index

  BRIDGE BITES         INDEX 61-80          
   
A THOUGHTFUL LEAD 61 In which a thoughtful West considers the clues and comes up with a devastating opening lead
MEA CULPA 62 West finds an awkward opening lead and South misses the chance to pull off a rare coup
THIRD TIME LUCKY 63 As is quite often the case, Declarer must set up her side-suit before drawing trumps
PLAYING THE PERCENTAGES 64 Two chances are better than one and realization of that simple fact allows Declarer to bring home his slam
NICE TRY 65 In a fascinating battle of wits between Declarer and the defense, it is Declarer who has the last word
FAILURE TO COMMUNICATE 66 West fails to keep open the lines of communication with Partner and another beatable contract squeaks home
A FREE SHOT 67 Declarer squanders his Club Two and a brilliant East false card makes him pay the price
A STRANGE LEAD 68 When Partner makes an "impossible" opening lead then maybe she is trying to tell you something
AN "OOPS" MOMENT 69 Declarer's slam looked altogether too easy until he blundered his way into an "Oops!" moment
SQUEEZED IN 3 SUITS 70 Accurate card reading allows Declarer to squeeze West until the pips squeak
DECLARE OR DEFEND? 71 In which you will be given the choice of whether you would prefer to declare 4♠ or defend 4♠
SPORTING DOUBLE 72 This usually means a Double which is a sure thing, but East found out that it was not as sure as he thought
TWO-EDGED SWORD 73 West's count signal helps East to find the right defense, but unfortunately it also helps Declarer find the winning line
READING THE LEAD 74 In which Declarer reads the opening lead correctly, guesses trumps, remembers the auction, and makes a discovery play ... all that just for an overtrick
DIFFERENT CONTRACT 75 Declarer might play this in 3NT or 4♠ but in either case the same ploy will reel in the contract
DUPLICATE DECISION 76 For Declarer it's "Heads she wins, tails she loses only occasionally"  Who could resist a bet like that?
A SITTING DUCK 77 If Declarer remembers the auction then poor East is a sitting duck to be endplayed
THE GRIFFINS CLUB 78 In which we enjoy the amusing antics of the Rueful Rabbit and the Hideous Hog
THE ONLY CHANCE 79 It took exactly the right distribution for Declarer to land his contract, but it was the only chance and he took it
NERVES OF STEEL 80 It didn't really take nerves of steel, just some counting so as to be ready with a smooth duck in the end-game
