Source: Bicycle Cards — Solitaire
URL: https://bicyclecards.com/how-to-play/solitaire
Captured 2026-10-07 from complete rendered official source-page response; web-open locators are original page line numbers. Text below preserves all substantive lines of the page.
L9 # Solitaire
L11 Solitaire is one of the most pleasurable pastimes for one person. Often called, “Patience,” more than 150 Solitaire games have been devised.
L13 Game Type
L15 Solitaire
L17 Age
L19 8+
L21 Players
L23 1
L24 Many Solitaire games can be played on areas smaller than a card table. Others require a larger playing area, and these games are often played on the floor or on a bedspread. Alternatively, to play with large layouts on a card table, miniature playing cards are available. These are usually half the size of standard playing cards.
L25 The Pack
L27 Virtually all Solitaire games are played with one or more standard 52-card packs. Standard Solitaire uses one 52-card pack.
L29 Object of the Game
L31 The first objective is to release and play into position certain cards to build up each foundation, in sequence and in suit, from the ace through the king. The ultimate objective is to build the whole pack onto the foundations, and if that can be done, the Solitaire game is won.
L32 Rank of Cards
L34 The rank of cards in Solitaire games is: K (high), Q, J, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, A (low).
L35 The Deal
L37 There are four different types of piles in Solitaire:
L39 The Tableau: Seven piles that make up the main table.
L41 The Foundations: Four piles on which a whole suit or sequence must be built up. In most Solitaire games, the four aces are the bottom card or base of the foundations. The foundation piles are hearts, diamonds, spades, and clubs.
L42 The Stock (or “Hand”) Pile: If the entire pack is not laid out in a tableau at the beginning of a game, the remaining cards form the stock pile from which additional cards are brought into play according to the rules.
L44 The Talon (or “Waste”) Pile: Cards from the stock pile that have no place in the tableau or on foundations are laid face up in the waste pile.
L45 To form the tableau, seven piles need to be created. Starting from left to right, place the first card face up to make the first pile, deal one card face down for the next six piles. Starting again from left to right, place one card face up on the second pile and deal one card face down on piles three through seven. Starting again from left to right, place one card face up on the third pile and deal one card face down on piles four through seven.
L46 Continue this pattern until pile seven has one card facing up on top of a pile of six cards facing down.
L47 The remaining cards form the stock (or “hand”) pile and are placed above the tableau.
L49 When starting out, the foundations and waste pile do not have any cards.
L50 The Play
L51 The initial array may be changed by “building” - transferring cards among the face-up cards in the tableau. Certain cards of the tableau can be played at once, while others may not be played until certain blocking cards are removed. For example, if one card is a nine and another is a ten, you may transfer the nine to on top of the ten to begin building that pile in sequence.
L52 Since you have moved the nine from one pile, you have now unblocked a face-down card; this card can be turned over and now is in play.
L53 As you transfer cards in the tableau and begin building sequences, if you uncover an ace, the ace should be placed in a foundation pile. Foundations are built by suit and in sequence from ace to king.
L54 If you cannot move any more face-up cards, you can use the stock pile by flipping over the first card. It can be played in the foundations or tableau. If it cannot be played, move it to the waste pile and turn over another stock card.
L55 A tableau vacancy is called a “space” and can only be filled with a king.
L57 Continue until all cards are built in suit sequences in the foundation piles to win!
