Source: World Series of Poker — 2011 Live Action Rules
URL: https://www.wsop.com/pdfs/2010/2011-Live-Action-Rules.pdf
Captured 2026-10-07 by opening and reading the complete official PDF in the web reader (17 pages). The selected full passages below are from the official original PDF; a command-line PDF response was retained separately at wsop-live-action-rules-2011.pdf but the host left the body stream open.
Page 7, section BUTTON AND BLIND USE, lines 331–338:
In button games, a non-playing dealer normally does the actual dealing. A round disk called the button is used to indicate which player has the dealer position. The player with the button is last to receive cards on the initial deal and has the right of last action after the first betting round. The button moves clockwise after a deal ends to rotate the advantage of last action. One or more blind bets are usually used to stimulate action and initiate play. Blinds are posted before the players look at their cards. A blind other than the big blind may be treated as dead, not part of the poster’s bet. With two blinds, the small blind is posted by the first player clockwise from the button, and the big blind is posted by the player two positions clockwise from the button. With more than two blinds, the smallest blind is normally left of the button, not on it. Action is initiated on the first betting round by the first player to the left of the blinds. On all subsequent betting rounds, the action begins with the first active player to the left of the button.
Page 8, section VII — TEXAS HOLD’EM, lines 372–379:
In Texas Hold’Em, each player receives two down cards as their personal hand, hole cards, after which there is a round of betting. The dealer burns a card and three board cards are then turned simultaneously called the “flop” and another round of betting occurs. The next board card, the “turn”, is placed out on the board with a burn card preceding with a betting round. The final card, “the river”, is placed out on the board with a burn card preceding with the final betting round. The board cards are community cards, and a player may use any five-card combination from among the board and personal cards to make the best possible five-card poker hand. A player may use all of the board cards and no personal cards to form a hand playing the board. A dealer button is used.
